---
title: "International Organizations"
collection: teaching
type: "BA in Political Science and International Relations"
permalink: /teaching/2021-IOs
venue: "University of Beira Interior"
date: 2021-02-23
location: "Covilhã, Portugal"
---

Several dynamics in power management are in confrontation. From geopolitical structures to global governance models that shape perceptions of the world since modern times. We aim to go beyond common wisdom by providing a dynamic, responsible, autonomous and close teacher-student relationship. In pursuing this, the course is based on quasi-permanent availability, informality and critical thinking.

In order to achieve the above (and below) goals, this course proposes a critical approach to International Organizations (IOs) and Institutions (IIs) as vehicles of power management in international politics. The course explains their raison d'etrê and emergence in the 18th and 19th centuries, as well as their relevance in contemporary global systems.

First, we work on the theoretical and conceptual debate to further analyze the organization and functioning of several International Organizations and Institutions. We introduce the students to several IOs and IIs, not only at international, but also at regional level, in the following aspects: origins, evolution, objectives, actions, functions, organizational structure, current importance and nowadays challenges to global governance models. Furthermore, we aim at contributing to a broader reflection on its reform and innovation at the international scene in times of major transformations and globalization.

The syllabus merges both theoretical/fundamental knowledge and applied expertise, in order to operationalize coherently the main objectives of the curricular unit. The topics have been carefully selected to provide students with a common understanding of the core and emerging themes in political science and international relations, as well as to train their reflections skills in view of the elaboration of their final essay project (both in the work plan proposal and the final written assignment versions). Students will be in contact with the most up-to-date endeavours and debates in the selected subfields, so that they develop a critical knowledge about different international political issues and to help them rethink and redefine their theoretical and empirical assumptions. It matches the curricular unit’s learning outcomes by:

a) Creating an environment of academic critical discussion, which requires from students an increasing sophistication of argumentative skills and theoretical sensitivity during the semester;
b) Providing a dynamic acquisition of specialised knowledge and through an interdisciplinary articulation of the different sub-areas covered;
b) Enabling a dynamic and informal interaction between teacher and students in the context of activating forms of participation around issues relevant to the preparation of their written assignments.


[Syllabus](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ik3lvmeuk5ncncm/Syllabus.pdf?dl=0) (2020/2021)
